---
title: HTML
navTitle: HTML
description: Initial guidance for working with Hypertext Markup Language
position: 1
category: HTML, front-end
date: '2017-05-03'
---

## HTML

HTML should be prepared using a template language.
[Pug](/pug) is recommended for static files.

Some variance from the below guidance is expected
if using a framework to generate HTML from reactive
or shadow-DOM data (for attribute order and boolean
attributes for example). However given that overall on a
project the goal is consistency this should be documented
and monitored along those lines.

### Syntax

::content-list-two{icon="heroicons-outline:check-circle"}

- Use two spaces for indentation
- Use single quotation marks for attributes
- Don't repeat IDs in a document

::

### Encoding

::content-list-two{icon="heroicons-outline:check-circle"}

- Use UTF-8 encoding and custom characters instead of HTML entities.

::

### Attributes

::content-list-two{icon="heroicons-outline:check-circle"}

- Omit `type` attributes in CSS and JavaScript
- Omit values in boolean attributes
- Comply to the following attribute order ...
  - class
  - id, name
  - data-\*
  - src, for, type, href, value
  - title, alt
  - role, aria-\*

::

### Nesting

HTML Tags should be properly nested per the document specification.
Incorrectly nested tags are usually not a problem if a templating language
is used to generate HTML but can emerge if fragmented HTML is delivered from
multiple partials.

Ideally run pages through the [W3C markup validation service][w3c-validation]
as part of build. This will reveal issues immediately.

### Accessibility

Projects must meet AA checkpoints from [WCAG 2.1 standards][wcag],
and where possible, we should aim for support of AAA checkpoints.

Full guidelines on implementation of accessible markup is outside the scope
of this document. The [WAVE tool from WebAIM][wave] is a good way to audit
your sites. Careful consideration should be given to the introduction of
some audit tooling in the build process. WAVE is good for manual tests but
Axe and a11y in Storybook can also assist in testing and automation. Axe also
provide a linter plug-in for VS Code.

[pug]: https://pugjs.org/api/getting-started.html
[w3c-validation]: https://validator.w3.org/
[wcag]: https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/
[wave]: https://wave.webaim.org/extension/
[axe-vs]: https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=deque-systems.vscode-axe-linter
